Section 7: Laws and Rules of the Road - California DMV

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
Ask DMV

 

 

 
&times;

 

 
General Disclaimer

 
When interacting with the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) Virtual Assistant, please do not include any personal information.

When your chat is over, you can save the transcript. Use caution when using a public computer or device.

 

 

 Third-Party Translation Disclaimer 

 
 

 
Expand Disclaimer

 
 

 

 
 

 
Collapse Disclaimer

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Third-Party Translation Disclaimer 

 
The DMV chatbot and live chat services use third-party vendors to provide machine translation. Machine translation is provided for purposes of information and convenience only. The DMV is unable to guarantee the accuracy of any translation provided by the third-party vendors and is therefore not liable for any inaccurate information or changes in the formatting of the content resulting from the use of the translation service.

The content currently in English is the official and accurate source for the program information and services DMV provides. Any discrepancies or differences created in the translation are not binding and have no legal effect for compliance or enforcement purposes. If any questions arise related to the information contained in the translated content, please refer to the English version.

 

 

 
 

 

 

 I agree 

 

 

 Continue 

 

 

 

 Skip to content 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 State of California 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 State of California Department of Motor Vehicles 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Menu 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
Search

 
 

 

 

 

 Search to find a office, self-service kiosk, and community partners. 

 

 

 
 

 
Search Submit

 
 

 

 

 Submit search form 

 

 

 

 

REAL ID

Online Services

Translate

MyDMV

 

 

Vehicle Registration

 
 
 

 

Renew Registration

Renew Registration

New Registration

New Registration

Replace Registration

Replace Registration

Submit Proof of Insurance

Submit Proof of Insurance

Request Vehicle Record

Request Vehicle Record

Plates, Stickers, Placards

Plates, Stickers, Placards

 

Driver&#039;s Licenses & IDs

 
 
 

 

Renew DL/ID

Renew DL/ID

New DL/ID Card Application

New DL/ID Card Application

Replace DL

Replace DL

Join the mDL Pilot

Join the mDL Pilot

Request Driver Record

Request Driver Record

 

Make a Payment

 
 
 

 

Payments &#038; Refunds

Payments &#038; Refunds

Pay Late Registration Fee

Pay Late Registration Fee

Pay Reinstatement Fee

Pay Reinstatement Fee

Dishonored Check Payment

Dishonored Check Payment

Fee Calculator

Fee Calculator

Shopping Cart

Shopping Cart

 

Appointments

 
 
 

 

Locations &#038; Hours

Locations &#038; Hours

Get in Line Now

Get in Line Now

Schedule Appointment

Schedule Appointment

 

Testing

 
 
 

 

Online Testing

Online Testing

Driver Handbooks

Driver Handbooks

Specialty Driver Guides

Specialty Driver Guides

How-To Videos

How-To Videos

Practice Tests

Practice Tests

 

Check Status

 
 
 

 

Change of Address Status

Change of Address Status

Virtual Office Case Status

Virtual Office Case Status

Driver Safety Case Status

Driver Safety Case Status

Registration Renewal Status

Registration Renewal Status

DL/ID Renewal Status

DL/ID Renewal Status

IBC Case Status

IBC Case Status

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Home

 

 

 
California Driver's Handbook

 

 

 

 

 
California Driver's Handbook

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Section 11 of 22 

 

 

 

 
Close 

 Table of Contents 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
DMV Services

 

 

 

 

 
Copyright

 

 

 

 

 
Disclaimer

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1: The California Driver's License

 

 

 

 

 
Section 2: Getting an Instruction Permit and Driver’s License

 

 

 

 

 
Section 3: The Testing Process

 

 

 

 

 
Section 4: Changing, Replacing, and Renewing Your Driver’s License

 

 

 

 

 
Section 5: An Introduction to Driving

 

 

 

 

 
Section 6: Navigating the Roads

 

 

 

 

 
Section 6: Navigating the Roads (Continued)

 

 

 

 

 
Section 7: Laws and Rules of the Road

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 7: Laws and Rules of the Road (Continued)

 

 

 

 

 
Section 7: Laws and Rules of the Road (Continued)

 

 

 

 

 
Section 8: Safe Driving

 

 

 

 

 
Section 8: Safe Driving (Continued)

 

 

 

 

 
Section 8: Safe Driving (Continued)

 

 

 

 

 
Section 9: Alcohol and Drugs

 

 

 

 

 
Section 10: Financial Responsibility, Insurance Requirements, and Collisions

 

 

 

 

 
Section 11: Vehicle Registration Requirements

 

 

 

 

 
Section 12: Driver Safety

 

 

 

 

 
Section 13: Seniors and Driving

 

 

 

 

 
Section 14: Glossary

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
Section 7: Laws and Rules of the Road

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
Previous Page Arrow

 
 

 

 Previous Section 

 

 
 

 

 Next Section 
 

 
Next Page Arrow

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Traffic Control

When at or approaching traffic signals or signs, yield to pedestrians, bicyclists, and other nearby vehicles that may have the right-of-way. See 
Right of Way Rules: Who Goes First
, in this section.

Traffic Signals

Solid Red Light

A red traffic signal light means STOP. You can turn right at a red light, if:

There is not a NO TURN ON RED sign posted.

You stop at the stop or limit line, yield for pedestrians, and turn when it is safe.

Red Arrow

A red arrow means STOP. Do not turn at a red arrow. Remain stopped until a green traffic signal light or green arrow appears.

Flashing Red Light

A flashing red signal light means STOP. After stopping, you may go when it is safe.

Solid Yellow Light

A yellow traffic signal light means CAUTION. The light is about to turn red. When you see a yellow traffic signal light, stop, if you can do so safely. If you cannot stop safely, cautiously cross the intersection.

Yellow Arrow

A yellow arrow means the protected turning time is ending. The signal will change soon. If you cannot stop safely or you are already in the intersection, cautiously complete your turn. Pay attention to the next signal. It could be a:

Green or red traffic signal light.

Red Arrow.

Flashing Yellow Light

A flashing yellow traffic signal light is a warning to PROCEED WITH CAUTION. Slow down and be alert. You do not need to stop.

Flashing Yellow Arrow

You can turn, but your turn is not protected from other traffic. Proceed to turn left after yielding to oncoming traffic and proceed with caution.

Solid Green Light

A green traffic signal light means GO. You should still stop for any vehicle, bicyclist, or pedestrian in the intersection. Only proceed if you have enough space without creating a danger to any oncoming vehicle, bicyclist, or pedestrian. Do not enter the intersection if you cannot get completely across before the traffic signal light turns red.

Green Arrow

A green arrow means GO in the direction the arrow is pointing. The green arrow allows you to make a protected turn. Oncoming vehicles are stopped by a red traffic signal light.

Traffic Light Not Working

When a traffic light is not working, stop as if the intersection is controlled by STOP signs in all directions. Then proceed cautiously when it is safe to do so.

Pedestrian Signals and Signs

WALK or Walking Person

You may cross the street.

Don’t Walk or Raised Hand

You may not cross the street.

Flashing Don’t Walk or Flashing Raised Hand

Do not start crossing the street. The traffic signal light is about to change. Drivers must yield to pedestrians, even if the Don’t Walk light is flashing.

Numbers

The numbers count down the seconds left for crossing the street.

Diagonal Crossing

These are crisscross and diagonal crosswalks that allow pedestrians to cross the intersection in any direction at the same time. Cross only when the walk signal allows it.

Sounds

Sounds such as beeping, chirping, or verbal messages help blind or visually impaired pedestrians cross the street.

Pedestrian Push Button

This is used to activate the WALK or Walking Person signal.

No Pedestrian Signals

If there are no pedestrian signals, obey the vehicle traffic signals.

Signs

Obey all warning signs regardless of their shape or color.

STOP Sign

Make a full stop before entering the crosswalk or at the limit line. If there is no limit line or crosswalk, stop before entering the intersection. Check traffic in all directions before proceeding.

Red YIELD Sign

Slow down and be ready to stop to let any vehicle, bicyclist, or pedestrian pass before you proceed.

Red and White Regulatory Sign

Follow the sign’s instruction. For example, DO NOT ENTER means do not enter the road or ramp where the sign is posted.

WRONG WAY Sign

If you enter a roadway against traffic, DO NOT ENTER and WRONG WAY signs may be posted. When it is safe, back out or turn around. If you are driving at night, you will know you are going the wrong way if the road reflectors shine red in your headlights.

Red Circle with a Red Line Through It

The picture inside the circle shows what you cannot do and may be shown with words.

Yellow and Black Circular Sign or X-shaped Sign

You are approaching a railroad crossing. Look, listen, slow down, and prepare to stop. Let any trains pass before you proceed.

Many railroad crossings also have a blue and white sign to tell you what to do if there is an emergency on or near the tracks or if your vehicle has stalled on the tracks.

5-sided Sign

You are near a school. Drive slowly and stop for children in the crosswalk.

Diamond-shaped Sign

Warns you of specific road conditions and dangers ahead.

White Rectangular Sign

Communicates many important rules you must obey.

Warning Signs

Warns of conditions related to pedestrians, bicyclists, schools, playgrounds, school buses, and school passenger loading zones.

For more information about signs, visit 
dot.ca.gov/programs/safety-programs/sign-charts
.

Right-of-Way Rules: Who Goes First?

Right-of-way rules help you understand who goes first when vehicles, pedestrians, and bicyclists meet on the road. The vehicle that arrives to the intersection first has the right-of-way. Other vehicles, bicyclists, and pedestrians must wait for the person who has the right-of-way. Never assume that other drivers will give you the right-of-way. Give up your right-of-way when it will help prevent collisions.

Intersections

An intersection is any place where one road meets another road. Controlled intersections have signs or traffic signal lights. Uncontrolled and blind intersections do not. Before entering an intersection, look left, right, and ahead to check for vehicles, bicyclists, and pedestrians. Be prepared to slow down and stop if necessary. Pedestrians always have the right-of-way. Here are some right-of-way rules at intersections:

Without STOP or YIELD signs:
 The vehicle that arrives to the intersection first has the right-of-way. However, if a vehicle, pedestrian, or bicyclist gets to the intersection at the same time as you, give the right-of-way to the vehicle, pedestrian, or bicyclist on your right. If you approach a stop sign and there is a stop sign on all four corners, stop first and proceed as above.

T intersections without STOP or YIELD signs:
 Vehicles, bicyclists, and pedestrians on the through road (continuing to go straight) have the right-of-way.

Turning left:
 Check for pedestrians. Give the right-of-way to any pedestrian or approaching vehicle that is close enough to be dangerous.

Turning right:
 Always check for pedestrians crossing the street, and motorcycles and bicycles riding next to you.

Green traffic signal light:
 Proceed with caution. Pedestrians have the right-of-way.

Entering traffic:
 When entering traffic, you must proceed with caution and yield to the traffic already occupying the lanes. It is against the law to stop or block an intersection where there is not enough space to completely cross before the traffic signal light turns red.

Roundabouts

In a roundabout, traffic travels in one direction around a central island.

How to use a roundabout:

Slow down as you approach.

Yield to all traffic already in the roundabout.

Enter heading to the right when there is a big enough gap in traffic to merge safely.

Watch for signs and lane markings that guide you.

Travel in a counter-clockwise direction. Do not stop or pass.

Signal when you change lanes or exit.

If you miss your exit, continue around until you return to your exit.

If the roundabout has multiple lanes, choose your entry or exit lane based on your destination. This is shown in the image below. To:

Turn right (yellow car): Choose the right lane and exit in the right lane.

Go straight (red car): Choose either lane. Exit in the lane you entered.

Turn left: Enter and continue driving until you reach the exit in the direction you choose (blue car).

Right Turn

Straight

Left Turn

Pedestrians

These are considered pedestrians or vulnerable road users:

A person walking.

A person traveling on something other than a vehicle or bicycle. This includes roller skates, a skateboard, etc.

A person with a 

disability

 using a tricycle, quadricycle, or wheelchair for transportation.

From left to right: Tricycle, Quadricycle, Standard Wheelchair, Electric Wheelchair.

Although pedestrians have the right-of-way, they also must follow the rules of the road.

When there is a pedestrian crossing a roadway with or without a crosswalk, you 
must
 use caution, reduce your speed, or stop to allow the pedestrian to safely finish crossing.

Other things to keep in mind:

Do not pass a vehicle stopped at a crosswalk. You may not be able to see a pedestrian crossing the street.

If a pedestrian makes eye contact with you, they are ready to cross the street. Yield to the pedestrian.

Always allow pedestrians enough time to safely cross a street as some groups such as seniors, people with small children, and people with disabilities may require extra time.

Crosswalks

A crosswalk is the part of the road set aside for pedestrians to safely cross the road. They are often marked with white lines. School crossings may have yellow crosswalk lines. Not all crosswalks are marked.

Pedestrians have the right-of-way in marked or unmarked crosswalks. If there is a limit line before the crosswalk, stop at the limit line and allow pedestrians to cross the street.

Some crosswalks have flashing lights. Whether or not the lights are flashing, look for pedestrians and be prepared to stop.

Pedestrians who are Blind

Pedestrians using guide dogs or white canes have the right-of-way at all times. These pedestrians are partially or totally blind. Be careful when you are turning or backing up. This is particularly important if you are driving a hybrid or electric vehicle because blind pedestrians rely on sound to know there is a vehicle nearby.

Do not stop in the middle of a crosswalk. This could force a blind pedestrian to walk into traffic outside of the crosswalk.

Do not honk your horn at a blind person.

When a blind person pulls in their cane and steps away from the intersection, this gesture usually means you may go.

Mountain Roads

If two vehicles meet on a steep narrow road and neither vehicle can pass, the vehicle facing uphill has the right-of-way. The vehicle facing downhill has more control when backing up the hill. The vehicle facing downhill should back up until the vehicle going uphill can pass.

 

 

 Additional Formats 

 

 

 

 
PDF Select & Download

 

 
Select PDF Language

 
English

 
Espa&ntilde;ol (Spanish)

 
ng&ocirc;n ngữ tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)

 
русский язык (Russian)

 
հայոց լեզու (Armenian)

 
हिन्दी भाषा (Hindi)

 
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ ਭਾਸ਼ਾ (Punjabi)

 
中文 (Chinese)

 

 

 
Open selection options

 
 

 
Open PDF Language Select Menu

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
Download PDF

 
 

 
Download PDF

 
 

 

 

 

 

 American Sign Language Video 

 
Play Video on YouTube

 
 

 
Play Video

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
Previous Page Arrow

 
 

 

 Previous Section 

 

 
 

 

 Next Section 
 

 
Next Page Arrow

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
Was this page helpful?

 

 

 👍
 

 

 👎
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Copyright &copy; 2026 State of California 

 

 

About DMV

Privacy Policy

Cookie Policy

Conditions of Use

Site Map

Accessibility

Forms

 

 

 

 

 

 
 Logo

 
 

 

 

 

 
 Logo

 
 

 

 

 

 
 Logo

 
 

 

 

 

 
 Logo

 
 

 

 

 

 
 Logo

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
&times;

 

 Google&trade; Translate Disclaimer 

 
The Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) website uses Google&trade; Translate to provide automatic translation of its web pages. This translation application tool is provided for purposes of information and convenience only. Google&trade; Translate is a free third-party service, which is not controlled by the DMV. The DMV is unable to guarantee the accuracy of any translation provided by Google&trade; Translate and is therefore not liable for any inaccurate information or changes in the formatting of the pages resulting from the use of the translation application tool.

 
The web pages currently in English on the DMV website are the official and accurate source for the program information and services the DMV provides. Any discrepancies or differences created in the translation are not binding and have no legal effect for compliance or enforcement purposes. If any questions arise related to the information contained in the translated website, please refer to the English version.

 
The following pages provided on the DMV website cannot be translated using Google&trade; Translate:

 

 
Forms

 
Publications

 
Field Office Locations

 
Online Applications

 

 

 

 

 

 Ok 

 

 

 

 

 
&times;

 

 Please install the Google Toolbar 

 

 Google Translate is not support in your browser. To translate this page, please 

 install the Google Toolbar (opens in new window) 
.
 

 

 

 

 

 
Close Form Filler