Section 5: An Introduction to Driving - California DMV

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
Ask DMV

 

 

 
&times;

 

 
General Disclaimer

 
When interacting with the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) Virtual Assistant, please do not include any personal information.

When your chat is over, you can save the transcript. Use caution when using a public computer or device.

 

 

 Third-Party Translation Disclaimer 

 
 

 
Expand Disclaimer

 
 

 

 
 

 
Collapse Disclaimer

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Third-Party Translation Disclaimer 

 
The DMV chatbot and live chat services use third-party vendors to provide machine translation. Machine translation is provided for purposes of information and convenience only. The DMV is unable to guarantee the accuracy of any translation provided by the third-party vendors and is therefore not liable for any inaccurate information or changes in the formatting of the content resulting from the use of the translation service.

The content currently in English is the official and accurate source for the program information and services DMV provides. Any discrepancies or differences created in the translation are not binding and have no legal effect for compliance or enforcement purposes. If any questions arise related to the information contained in the translated content, please refer to the English version.

 

 

 
 

 

 

 I agree 

 

 

 Continue 

 

 

 

 Skip to content 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 State of California 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 State of California Department of Motor Vehicles 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Menu 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
Search

 
 

 

 

 

 Search to find a office, self-service kiosk, and community partners. 

 

 

 
 

 
Search Submit

 
 

 

 

 Submit search form 

 

 

 

 

REAL ID

Online Services

Translate

MyDMV

 

 

Vehicle Registration

 
 
 

 

Renew Registration

Renew Registration

New Registration

New Registration

Replace Registration

Replace Registration

Submit Proof of Insurance

Submit Proof of Insurance

Request Vehicle Record

Request Vehicle Record

Plates, Stickers, Placards

Plates, Stickers, Placards

 

Driver&#039;s Licenses & IDs

 
 
 

 

Renew DL/ID

Renew DL/ID

New DL/ID Card Application

New DL/ID Card Application

Replace DL

Replace DL

Join the mDL Pilot

Join the mDL Pilot

Request Driver Record

Request Driver Record

 

Make a Payment

 
 
 

 

Payments &#038; Refunds

Payments &#038; Refunds

Pay Late Registration Fee

Pay Late Registration Fee

Pay Reinstatement Fee

Pay Reinstatement Fee

Dishonored Check Payment

Dishonored Check Payment

Fee Calculator

Fee Calculator

Shopping Cart

Shopping Cart

 

Appointments

 
 
 

 

Locations &#038; Hours

Locations &#038; Hours

Get in Line Now

Get in Line Now

Schedule Appointment

Schedule Appointment

 

Testing

 
 
 

 

Online Testing

Online Testing

Driver Handbooks

Driver Handbooks

Specialty Driver Guides

Specialty Driver Guides

How-To Videos

How-To Videos

Practice Tests

Practice Tests

 

Check Status

 
 
 

 

Change of Address Status

Change of Address Status

Virtual Office Case Status

Virtual Office Case Status

Driver Safety Case Status

Driver Safety Case Status

Registration Renewal Status

Registration Renewal Status

DL/ID Renewal Status

DL/ID Renewal Status

IBC Case Status

IBC Case Status

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Home

 

 

 
California Driver's Handbook

 

 

 

 

 
California Driver's Handbook

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Section 8 of 22 

 

 

 

 
Close 

 Table of Contents 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
DMV Services

 

 

 

 

 
Copyright

 

 

 

 

 
Disclaimer

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1: The California Driver's License

 

 

 

 

 
Section 2: Getting an Instruction Permit and Driver’s License

 

 

 

 

 
Section 3: The Testing Process

 

 

 

 

 
Section 4: Changing, Replacing, and Renewing Your Driver’s License

 

 

 

 

 
Section 5: An Introduction to Driving

 

 

 

 

 
Section 6: Navigating the Roads

 

 

 

 

 
Section 6: Navigating the Roads (Continued)

 

 

 

 

 
Section 7: Laws and Rules of the Road

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 7: Laws and Rules of the Road (Continued)

 

 

 

 

 
Section 7: Laws and Rules of the Road (Continued)

 

 

 

 

 
Section 8: Safe Driving

 

 

 

 

 
Section 8: Safe Driving (Continued)

 

 

 

 

 
Section 8: Safe Driving (Continued)

 

 

 

 

 
Section 9: Alcohol and Drugs

 

 

 

 

 
Section 10: Financial Responsibility, Insurance Requirements, and Collisions

 

 

 

 

 
Section 11: Vehicle Registration Requirements

 

 

 

 

 
Section 12: Driver Safety

 

 

 

 

 
Section 13: Seniors and Driving

 

 

 

 

 
Section 14: Glossary

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
Section 5: An Introduction to Driving

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
Previous Page Arrow

 
 

 

 Previous Section 

 

 
 

 

 Next Section 
 

 
Next Page Arrow

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Your health may affect your driving.

Vision 
– You must be able to notice hazards in different types of lighting, judge distances, adjust to traffic speed, and read road signs.

Hearing 
– You must be able to hear horns, sirens, motorcycles, or screeching tires that may alert you of hazards. It is illegal to wear a headset or earplugs in both ears while driving. 

Fatigue and Drowsiness
 – Can affect your vision and increase reaction time to hazards.

Physical and Mental
 – You must be alert to quickly decide the correct course of action in any type of traffic situation, including unexpected ones.

Medications
 – Prescription and over-the-counter medications can make you an unsafe driver. Some medicines can make you sleepy. It is your responsibility to know the effects of the medications you take.

Health 
– Physicians are required to report patients, who are at least 14 years old, to DMV for medical conditions that may affect your ability to drive safely, such as lapse of consciousness.

Controlling the Vehicle

To control your vehicle, it is critical to keep both hands on the wheel whenever possible.

Hand-to-Hand Steering (Push/Pull)

To use this steering wheel method:

Start with your hands at 9 and 3 o’clock or 8 and 4 o’clock.

Do not cross your hands over the middle of the steering wheel.

Keep your hands in these positions, even when making turns.

Hand-Over-Hand Steering

Use this steering wheel method when you turn at low speeds, park, or need to recover from a skid. To use this method:

Start with your hands at 8 and 4 o’clock.

Reach across the steering wheel to grasp the opposite side.

Let go of the steering wheel with your other hand.

Reach across the arm still holding the wheel, grip the wheel, and pull up.

One-Hand Steering

There are only two situations that may require steering with one hand:

When you are turning while backing up to see where you are going behind you. Place your hand at the 12 o’clock position on the steering wheel.

When you are operating vehicle controls that require you to remove a hand from the steering wheel.

Signals, Horns, And Headlights

Your signals, horn, and headlights are important for communicating with other drivers, pedestrians, and bicyclists.

Signaling

Always signal when you turn, change lanes, slow down, or stop. 

You can signal using your vehicle’s signal lights or using hand-and-arm positions. If your signal lights are not functioning, or bright sunlight makes your signal lights hard to see, use the hand-and-arm signals shown in the image below.

LEFT TURN

RIGHT TURN

SLOW OR STOP

LEFT TURN

RIGHT TURN

SLOW OR STOP

Bicyclists may signal a turn with their arm held straight out, pointing in the direction they plan to turn.

You should signal:

At least 100 feet before you turn.

Before every lane change.

At least five seconds before you change lanes on a freeway.

Before pulling next to the curb or away from the curb.

Even when you do not see other vehicles around you.

When you are almost through the intersection if you plan to turn shortly after crossing the intersection.

Remember to turn off your signal when you no longer need it.

Using Your Horn

Use your vehicle’s horn to let other drivers know you are there or warn others of a hazard. Use your horn to:

Avoid collisions.

Alert oncoming traffic on narrow mountain roads where you cannot see at least 200 feet ahead.

Using Your Headlights

Your vehicle’s headlights help you see what is in front of you. They also make it easier for other drivers to see your vehicle. Dim your high-beam headlights to low beams within 500 feet of a vehicle coming toward you or within 300 feet of a vehicle you are following. It is illegal to drive using only parking lights. Use your headlights:

When it is too dark to see from 1,000 feet away.

Beginning 30 minutes after sunset.

Until 30 minutes before sunrise.

In adverse weather. If you need to use your windshield wipers due to fog, rain, or snow, you must turn on your low-beam headlights.

When conditions (such as clouds, dust, smoke, or fog) prevent you from seeing other vehicles.

On mountain roads and tunnels (even on sunny days).

When a road sign states that headlights must be on.

To help other drivers see your vehicle, especially when the sun is low on the horizon.

Using Your Emergency Flashers

If you can see a collision or hazard ahead, warn drivers behind you using these methods:

Turn on your emergency flashers.

Lightly tap your brake pedal three or four times.

Use a hand signal when slowing and stopping.

If you need to stop because of vehicle trouble:

Turn on your emergency flashers. If your vehicle does not have emergency flashers, use your turn signals.

If possible, pull off the road away from all traffic.

If you cannot get completely off the road, stop where people can see you and your vehicle from behind.

Do not stop just over a hill or just around a curve. Other drivers may not see your vehicle in time to avoid a collision.

Call for emergency roadside assistance and stay in your vehicle until help arrives.

 

 

 Additional Formats 

 

 

 

 
PDF Select & Download

 

 
Select PDF Language

 
English

 
Espa&ntilde;ol (Spanish)

 
ng&ocirc;n ngữ tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)

 
русский язык (Russian)

 
հայոց լեզու (Armenian)

 
हिन्दी भाषा (Hindi)

 
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ ਭਾਸ਼ਾ (Punjabi)

 
中文 (Chinese)

 

 

 
Open selection options

 
 

 
Open PDF Language Select Menu

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
Download PDF

 
 

 
Download PDF

 
 

 

 

 

 

 American Sign Language Video 

 
Play Video on YouTube

 
 

 
Play Video

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
Previous Page Arrow

 
 

 

 Previous Section 

 

 
 

 

 Next Section 
 

 
Next Page Arrow

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
Was this page helpful?

 

 

 👍
 

 

 👎
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Copyright &copy; 2026 State of California 

 

 

About DMV

Privacy Policy

Cookie Policy

Conditions of Use

Site Map

Accessibility

Forms

 

 

 

 

 

 
 Logo

 
 

 

 

 

 
 Logo

 
 

 

 

 

 
 Logo

 
 

 

 

 

 
 Logo

 
 

 

 

 

 
 Logo

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
&times;

 

 Google&trade; Translate Disclaimer 

 
The Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) website uses Google&trade; Translate to provide automatic translation of its web pages. This translation application tool is provided for purposes of information and convenience only. Google&trade; Translate is a free third-party service, which is not controlled by the DMV. The DMV is unable to guarantee the accuracy of any translation provided by Google&trade; Translate and is therefore not liable for any inaccurate information or changes in the formatting of the pages resulting from the use of the translation application tool.

 
The web pages currently in English on the DMV website are the official and accurate source for the program information and services the DMV provides. Any discrepancies or differences created in the translation are not binding and have no legal effect for compliance or enforcement purposes. If any questions arise related to the information contained in the translated website, please refer to the English version.

 
The following pages provided on the DMV website cannot be translated using Google&trade; Translate:

 

 
Forms

 
Publications

 
Field Office Locations

 
Online Applications

 

 

 

 

 

 Ok 

 

 

 

 

 
&times;

 

 Please install the Google Toolbar 

 

 Google Translate is not support in your browser. To translate this page, please 

 install the Google Toolbar (opens in new window) 
.
 

 

 

 

 

 
Close Form Filler