Section 8: Safe Driving (Continued) - California DMV

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
Ask DMV

 

 

 
&times;

 

 
General Disclaimer

 
When interacting with the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) Virtual Assistant, please do not include any personal information.

When your chat is over, you can save the transcript. Use caution when using a public computer or device.

 

 

 Third-Party Translation Disclaimer 

 
 

 
Expand Disclaimer

 
 

 

 
 

 
Collapse Disclaimer

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 Third-Party Translation Disclaimer 

 
The DMV chatbot and live chat services use third-party vendors to provide machine translation. Machine translation is provided for purposes of information and convenience only. The DMV is unable to guarantee the accuracy of any translation provided by the third-party vendors and is therefore not liable for any inaccurate information or changes in the formatting of the content resulting from the use of the translation service.

The content currently in English is the official and accurate source for the program information and services DMV provides. Any discrepancies or differences created in the translation are not binding and have no legal effect for compliance or enforcement purposes. If any questions arise related to the information contained in the translated content, please refer to the English version.

 

 

 
 

 

 

 I agree 

 

 

 Continue 

 

 

 

 Skip to content 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 State of California 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 State of California Department of Motor Vehicles 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Menu 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
Search

 
 

 

 

 

 Search to find a office, self-service kiosk, and community partners. 

 

 

 
 

 
Search Submit

 
 

 

 

 Submit search form 

 

 

 

 

REAL ID

Online Services

Translate

MyDMV

 

 

Vehicle Registration

 
 
 

 

Renew Registration

Renew Registration

New Registration

New Registration

Replace Registration

Replace Registration

Submit Proof of Insurance

Submit Proof of Insurance

Request Vehicle Record

Request Vehicle Record

Plates, Stickers, Placards

Plates, Stickers, Placards

 

Driver&#039;s Licenses & IDs

 
 
 

 

Renew DL/ID

Renew DL/ID

New DL/ID Card Application

New DL/ID Card Application

Replace DL

Replace DL

Join the mDL Pilot

Join the mDL Pilot

Request Driver Record

Request Driver Record

 

Make a Payment

 
 
 

 

Payments &#038; Refunds

Payments &#038; Refunds

Pay Late Registration Fee

Pay Late Registration Fee

Pay Reinstatement Fee

Pay Reinstatement Fee

Dishonored Check Payment

Dishonored Check Payment

Fee Calculator

Fee Calculator

Shopping Cart

Shopping Cart

 

Appointments

 
 
 

 

Locations &#038; Hours

Locations &#038; Hours

Get in Line Now

Get in Line Now

Schedule Appointment

Schedule Appointment

 

Testing

 
 
 

 

Online Testing

Online Testing

Driver Handbooks

Driver Handbooks

Specialty Driver Guides

Specialty Driver Guides

How-To Videos

How-To Videos

Practice Tests

Practice Tests

 

Check Status

 
 
 

 

Change of Address Status

Change of Address Status

Virtual Office Case Status

Virtual Office Case Status

Driver Safety Case Status

Driver Safety Case Status

Registration Renewal Status

Registration Renewal Status

DL/ID Renewal Status

DL/ID Renewal Status

IBC Case Status

IBC Case Status

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Home

 

 

 
California Driver's Handbook

 

 

 

 

 
California Driver's Handbook

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Section 16 of 22 

 

 

 

 
Close 

 Table of Contents 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
DMV Services

 

 

 

 

 
Copyright

 

 

 

 

 
Disclaimer

 

 

 

 

 
Section 1: The California Driver's License

 

 

 

 

 
Section 2: Getting an Instruction Permit and Driver’s License

 

 

 

 

 
Section 3: The Testing Process

 

 

 

 

 
Section 4: Changing, Replacing, and Renewing Your Driver’s License

 

 

 

 

 
Section 5: An Introduction to Driving

 

 

 

 

 
Section 6: Navigating the Roads

 

 

 

 

 
Section 6: Navigating the Roads (Continued)

 

 

 

 

 
Section 7: Laws and Rules of the Road

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Section 7: Laws and Rules of the Road (Continued)

 

 

 

 

 
Section 7: Laws and Rules of the Road (Continued)

 

 

 

 

 
Section 8: Safe Driving

 

 

 

 

 
Section 8: Safe Driving (Continued)

 

 

 

 

 
Section 8: Safe Driving (Continued)

 

 

 

 

 
Section 9: Alcohol and Drugs

 

 

 

 

 
Section 10: Financial Responsibility, Insurance Requirements, and Collisions

 

 

 

 

 
Section 11: Vehicle Registration Requirements

 

 

 

 

 
Section 12: Driver Safety

 

 

 

 

 
Section 13: Seniors and Driving

 

 

 

 

 
Section 14: Glossary

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
Section 8: Safe Driving (Continued)

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
Previous Page Arrow

 
 

 

 Previous Section 

 

 
 

 

 Next Section 
 

 
Next Page Arrow

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Manage Your Speed

In California, you may never drive faster than is safe for the current road conditions. This is known as the Basic Speed Law.

Make sure you manage your speed and slow down when conditions call for it. Regardless of the posted speed limit, your speed should depend on:

The number of vehicles on the road.

The speed of other vehicles on the road.

The road surface: smooth, rough, graveled, wet, dry, wide, or narrow.

Bicyclists or pedestrians on or crossing the road.

Weather: rain, fog, snow, wind, or dust.

Traffic congestion: small changes in your driving habits can help reduce congestion. Avoid weaving in and out of freeway lanes.

There are also situations with specific speed limit laws and conditions where you should reduce your speed. Unless otherwise posted, the ideal maximum speed limit on most California highways is 65 mph. It is 55 mph on a two-lane undivided highway and for vehicles towing trailers.

Choose Between Hazards

Sometimes dangers will be on both sides of the road at the same time. For example, parked cars to the right and oncoming cars to the left.

If one danger is greater than the other, give more space to the most dangerous situation. Suppose you are on a two-lane road with an oncoming vehicle to the left and a bicyclist ahead to your right. Instead of driving between the vehicle and the bicyclist, take one danger at a time. Slow down and let the oncoming vehicle pass. When the vehicle has passed, move to the left to allow plenty of space (at least three feet) to pass the bicyclist. If there is a steady flow of oncoming vehicles, use as much of the left lane as you safely can to pass the bicyclist.

Know How to Handle Emergencies

There are many types of emergencies you may encounter when you drive. Knowing how to handle emergencies can help keep you safe.

Tire Blowout

If you have a tire blowout, do not panic or overreact. Suddenly braking or abruptly removing your foot from the accelerator can result in a loss of control over the vehicle. Instead, you should take the following steps recommended by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration:

Hold the steering wheel with both hands.

Maintain your vehicle speed if possible and safe.

Gradually release the accelerator.

Correct the steering as necessary to stabilize your vehicle and regain control.

Look and steer in the direction you want your vehicle to go.

Once your vehicle has stabilized, continue to slow down and pull off the road where and when it’s safe.

Driving Off the Pavement

If your wheels drift off the pavement:

Grip the steering wheel firmly.

Remove your foot from the accelerator.

Brake gently.

Check for traffic behind you.

Carefully steer back onto the pavement.

Do not pull or turn your steering wheel with too much force. This may cause you to drive into oncoming traffic.

Overheating Conditions

In extreme heat, you should:

Watch the temperature gauge.

Avoid driving at high speeds for long periods.

Turn off the air conditioner.

In extreme cold, you should:

Watch the temperature gauge. The engine may not have the correct level of antifreeze.

Use the defroster or slightly open your windows to keep them from fogging up.

Note
 See the vehicle owner’s manual for more information.

If Your Vehicle Becomes Disabled on the Freeway

If your vehicle stops working on the freeway:

Safely pull over to the right shoulder.

Exit on the right side so you are away from traffic if you must get out of the vehicle.

Dial 511 from your cell phone or locate call box for assistance..

Return to your vehicle as soon as you can. Get back into the vehicle from the right side (away from traffic).

Stay inside your vehicle with your seat belt on until help arrives.

Use your emergency flashers at your discretion. They can help other vehicles see you at night and in different weather conditions.

There are certain circumstances where it is safer to get out of your vehicle and stay away. These include situations where there is:

Not enough space on the shoulder.

A guardrail.

An area for you to safely stay away from freeway lanes.

California Highway Patrol (CHP) Freeway Service Patrol (FSP)

During commute times, the CHP FSP provides free emergency roadside services in certain areas. If you get stuck on the freeway because your vehicle stops running, FSP will:

Provide a gallon of gas if you run out.

Jump start your vehicle if the battery is dead.

Refill your radiator and tape hoses.

Change a flat tire.

Report a collision to CHP.

If FSP cannot start your vehicle, they will have it towed (free of charge) to a CHP-approved location. CHP will notify an auto club or towing service.

FSP will not:

Tow your vehicle to a private repair service or residence.

Recommend tow service companies or repair and body shops.

Tow motorcycles.

Help vehicles which have been involved in a collision, unless they are directed to by CHP.

Call 511 for FSP information and assistance.

Disabled Vehicles on Railroad Tracks

If your vehicle stalls or stops while blocking part of a train track with a train approaching and warning lights flashing:

Immediately exit your vehicle. Run away from the tracks diagonally in the direction the train is coming from. Then call 911.

If you do not see a train approaching and warning lights are not flashing:

Exit your vehicle. Dial the number located on the railroad crossing posts or metal control box near the tracks. Provide the crossing number (if posted). Tell them a vehicle is on the tracks. Then call 911.

Do Not Drive Distracted

Avoid distractions while you drive. Some common distractions are:

Looking at a phone, navigation system, children, and pets.

Changing music or volume.

Applying makeup or shaving.

Cell Phones and Texting

Cell phones are the main source of distracted driving. Driving while using a handheld cell phone is unsafe and illegal. 

Adult drivers should only use a cell phone in hands-free mode when necessary.

Do not answer your cell phone if it rings. Let the call go to voicemail. If you must return or make a call, pull safely off the road.

Do not send or read text messages or emails while driving.

Mount your cell phone on the windshield, dashboard, or center console. It cannot block your view of the road.

Use the single swipe or touch feature on the mounted cell phone.

Minors And Cell Phones

It is against the law for a minor to use a cell phone or electronic wireless device to answer calls and send or respond to text messages while driving.

EXCEPTION
: Minors may use a cell phone to make a call for emergency assistance.

Be Familiar with New Technology

The technology in vehicles is always advancing. We will see more self-driving vehicles and vehicles with advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS) on the road. Vehicles with these systems may respond to road situations differently than a human driver would.

Be Aware of Carbon Monoxide

All gas-powered vehicles produce carbon monoxide. Carbon monoxide is a deadly odorless gas released from a vehicle’s exhaust pipe. Never start your vehicle inside the garage with the door closed. Symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning include:

Tiredness

Yawning

Dizziness

Nausea

Headache

Ringing in the ears

If you are experiencing any of these symptoms, have your exhaust system checked.

 

 

 Additional Formats 

 

 

 

 
PDF Select & Download

 

 
Select PDF Language

 
English

 
Espa&ntilde;ol (Spanish)

 
ng&ocirc;n ngữ tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)

 
русский язык (Russian)

 
հայոց լեզու (Armenian)

 
हिन्दी भाषा (Hindi)

 
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ ਭਾਸ਼ਾ (Punjabi)

 
中文 (Chinese)

 

 

 
Open selection options

 
 

 
Open PDF Language Select Menu

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
Download PDF

 
 

 
Download PDF

 
 

 

 

 

 

 American Sign Language Video 

 
Play Video on YouTube

 
 

 
Play Video

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
Previous Page Arrow

 
 

 

 Previous Section 

 

 
 

 

 Next Section 
 

 
Next Page Arrow

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
Was this page helpful?

 

 

 👍
 

 

 👎
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Copyright &copy; 2026 State of California 

 

 

About DMV

Privacy Policy

Cookie Policy

Conditions of Use

Site Map

Accessibility

Forms

 

 

 

 

 

 
 Logo

 
 

 

 

 

 
 Logo

 
 

 

 

 

 
 Logo

 
 

 

 

 

 
 Logo

 
 

 

 

 

 
 Logo

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
&times;

 

 Google&trade; Translate Disclaimer 

 
The Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) website uses Google&trade; Translate to provide automatic translation of its web pages. This translation application tool is provided for purposes of information and convenience only. Google&trade; Translate is a free third-party service, which is not controlled by the DMV. The DMV is unable to guarantee the accuracy of any translation provided by Google&trade; Translate and is therefore not liable for any inaccurate information or changes in the formatting of the pages resulting from the use of the translation application tool.

 
The web pages currently in English on the DMV website are the official and accurate source for the program information and services the DMV provides. Any discrepancies or differences created in the translation are not binding and have no legal effect for compliance or enforcement purposes. If any questions arise related to the information contained in the translated website, please refer to the English version.

 
The following pages provided on the DMV website cannot be translated using Google&trade; Translate:

 

 
Forms

 
Publications

 
Field Office Locations

 
Online Applications

 

 

 

 

 

 Ok 

 

 

 

 

 
&times;

 

 Please install the Google Toolbar 

 

 Google Translate is not support in your browser. To translate this page, please 

 install the Google Toolbar (opens in new window) 
.
 

 

 

 

 

 
Close Form Filler